Cypress Point Golf Club in Pebble Beach, Calif., and the Los Angeles Country Club were selected by Billionaire.com as two of the 10 most exclusive golf courses in the world. The website that calls itself a “lifestyle resource for ultra high net worth individuals” (you know who you are, apparently) includes on its short list courses in the U.S., France, Scotland, England and Australia. “With over 30,000 golf courses worldwide, picking the top 10 most exclusive is a difficult -- and sometimes controversial -- task,” editor-at-large Tara Loader Wilkinson said in a statement Tuesday. Golf courses were judged by how difficult it is to become a member, how much membership costs, how the course was designed and other factors. Does this all sound snooty? That’s the point. After winnowing down the list, the website sought out the opinions of some choice golf lovers too. Cypress Point, part of the Cypress Point Club, came in at No. 1. It was designed in 1928 by Alistair Mackenzie and is located on a particularly stunning slice of Monterey Bay. Naturally it received high marks for the views, but also was singled out for the 250 members “many of whom are prominent political figures.” The Los Angeles Country Club at 10101 Wilshire Blvd. dates to 1897 and came in at No. 6. It earned props for having old L.A. families on its membership roster and reportedly employing “a strict no ‘movie-star’ policy.” Hey, isn’t that why you would want to join? Don’t expect to play on these exclusive greens; it’s mostly members only. Here are the rest of top 10: 2. National Golf Links of America in Southampton, N.Y.3. Augusta National Golf Course in Augusta, Ga.4. Golf de Morfontaine in Morfontaine, France5. Loch Lomond Golf Club, Dunbartonshire, Scotland7. Royal Melbourne (West) Golf Club, Melbourne, Australia8. Higashi-Hirono in Hyogo, Japan9. Swinley Forest Golf Club in Berkshire, England10. Gleneagles in Perthshire, Scotland (visitors are welcome to play here)  Check out “The World’s Most Exclusive Golf Courses.”