Eighteen years into an illustrious NBA career and Kobe Bryant remains as driven as ever. Bryant says it is his love for the game of basketball that drives him more than anything else, never mentioning Tuesday the need to prove his doubters wrong about his comeback from a second injury in the last two seasons with the Lakers. Without being prompted, Bryant talked about the torn left Achilles’ tendon injury he suffered at the end of the 2012-13 season. While recovering from that injury, Bryant returned for six games last season and then sat out 57 because of a fractured left knee. “I think the Achilles’ injury just ignited a new challenge for me personally to see if I can do this, right?” Bryant said after the Lakers’ first day of training camp practice. “Because you don’t know. So it’s a challenge that presented itself to see if I can make this a successful comeback. ” At 36, Bryant has heard his naysayers say he’s too old, that he can’t be the same player he once was, that his game has and will continue to slip. None of that seemed to be on Bryant’s mind Tuesday when he talked about returning from his injuries and playing this season. “My concerns are probably no different than everybody else’s, in terms of being able to come back from this,” said Bryant, who has two years and $48.5 million left on his deal. “I think a lot of it’s the same thing. If I can prove to myself that I can do this thing, I think I’ll prove it to everybody else as well.”  Though the Lakers practiced for almost three hours on Tuesday, Bryant said Coach Byron Scott sat him out about the last 30 to 40 minutes of practice “just to make sure we stick to the plan to make sure there’s something left in the tank.” “One step at a time,” Bryant said. “You take it day by day. Today was a really good day. Come back tomorrow and chip away at it again. It’s an everyday process.” Bryant is the only player on the team who has won an NBA championship, and this the Lakers team he has to lead. He doesn’t have teammates such as Pau Gasol, Derek Fisher, Lamar Odom, Shaquille O’Neal, Robert Horry and Rick Fox, players who helped Bryant win his five championships. It’ll be interesting to see how Bryant deals with his current teammates. “It’s always a personal touch,” Bryant said. “Every player is different. You’ve got to communicate with every player a little bit differently. Plus, it takes some time to get to know them. “But from a basic level, when you step on the court, things need to be done right. Things need to be done efficiently. That doesn’t change.”